Authenticated Scanning With Nessus
We can generate more detailed
information and reduce false positives
by performing an authenticated scan,
which requires valid target credentials.
To demonstrate the value
of an authenticated scan,
we will run one against
our Debian lab client.
To begin,
we’ll click the “New Scan” button.
Even though all Nessus templates accept user credentials,
we will use the Credentialed Patch Audit
scan template,
which comes preconfigured
to execute local security
checks against the target.
This template will not only scan for
missing operating system level patches,
but will also scan
for outdated applications
that could be vulnerable to vectors
such as privilege escalation.
Once again, we will provide a name
for the scan and set the target.
Note that the IP of your
Debian client will vary.
Next, we’ll click the “Credentials” tab,
and the SSH category.
On the “Authentication method”
dropdown, we’ll select “password”,
set the username to “root”,
and provide the password
for our Debian client.
While we will only use the SSH
configuration for this example,
we can easily review the other
Nessus-supported authentication mechanisms
by selecting “All” from the
“Categories” dropdown menu.
Finally, we can launch our scan.
As with the unauthenticated scan,
while the scan is in progress
the status is reported as “Running”.
Once the scan reaches
a “Completed” status,
we can click on the scan name
to open up the list of hosts,
and click on the Debian client’s IP.
This shows a list of the
discovered vulnerabilities
that may be exploitable
on the Debian target.
In this view, notice that the
vulnerabilities are listed with
patch numbers.
This is because Nessus determined
that the target was running
the Debian operating system
and executed only the
Debian Local Security Checks plugins.
We can see that the authenticated
scan was successful
as the scanner now has visibility
into vulnerable applications
that are not remotely exposed,
such as Firefox.